All sugar-free products are not necessarily calorie-free; certain sugar-free biscuits and cakes may still contain carbohydrates in the form of starch, which can lead to an increase in blood glucose levels.
Bitter-tasting foods can help lower blood glucose levels.
If you have diabetes, it does not mean you can never consume sugar; you may still be able to include some sugar in your diet by learning carbohydrate counting and knowing your requirements. Speak to your Dietician to know how.
Switching to wholegrain rice does not necessarily mean you can eat more rice; the carbohydrate content of wholegrain rice is actually similar to regular rice. However, wholegrain rice provides more fiber, making it a better choice for diabetes.
Eating as much as you want, even if you cut down on your carbohydrate intake, is not advisable; excessive intake of any nutrient, including protein, may lead to weight gain. It is essential to know your body's requirements for all nutrients and stick to them.
It is okay to eat your favorite sweets when you have low blood glucose, but in moderation. It is recommended to follow the 15/15 rule: consume 15g of fast-acting carbohydrates, such as half a can of soft drink or half a glass of fruit juice, followed by 15 minutes of rest, and then maintain your blood glucose level by consuming 15g of long-acting carbohydrates, such as 1 slice of bread or 3 pieces of plain biscuits.
People with diabetes should still eat all kinds of fruits, as they are rich sources of antioxidant vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Consume 2 portions of fresh fruit a day, but try to avoid fruit juices.
Having diabetes does not mean you can never consume starchy foods; all starchy foods break down to glucose, which is the body's preferred source of energy. The key is knowing your personalized requirements for carbohydrates and choosing starchy foods high in fiber, such as whole grains.
While fat does not directly impact blood glucose levels, a large amount of fat in a meal can delay stomach-emptying and slow the digestion of carbohydrates, keeping blood glucose levels elevated for longer. Consuming too much saturated fat may also lead to undesirable lipid profiles and increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases.
Losing weight may not definitively cure diabetes, but losing 5-10% of your initial weight may help you control blood glucose levels by improving insulin resistance and other health parameters.
There are 4 main types of diabetes: Type 1 diabetes, Type 2 diabetes, type 1.5 diabetes, and gestational diabetes.