One way to test for blood glucose level is by using a glucometer. A glucometer is small and can be used at home, in clinics and health centres to aid in diabetes detection. The blood glucose test is a similar finger-prick test to indicate blood glucose level at that point in time. It is convenient and can be accurate if done properly. Anyone, even a child, can be taught to perform the test and it is essential for a person with diabetes to operate the glucometer. Another way is to take the HbA1c (haemoglobin A1c) test, which reflects average blood glucose control for a three-month period. Haemoglobin A1c in the red blood cells (glycohemoglobin) are glycated or sugar coated. The body usually replaces red blood cells every three months. This is usually done quarterly in the laboratory. The blood glucose and HbA1c tests are not universally accepted as diagnostic tests for diabetes mellitus. But, if the person has symptoms of diabetes mellitus with abnormal HbA1c and/or high blood glucose level on subsequent days, the doctor can then confirm the diagnosis.

Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) is usually carried out to confirm if a person is suffering from diabetes. This test can also differentiate patients who have impaired fasting or glucose tolerance. Before taking the test, one must fast for at least eight hours before blood/plasma and urine samples are taken.

Ketones are the by-products of fat metabolism. Ketones are acidic, and if excessive amounts accumulate in the body, can poison brain cells. This occurs when there is not enough insulin to allow glucose to enter the cells and fuel them, or when there are too much stress hormones. Excessive ketones in the blood can render a person unconscious. It can happen when a person suffers from type 1 diabetes mellitus and the onset is usually sudden. This is a serious condition called Diabetic Keto-Acidosis (DKA).

Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) is a condition that occurs before one develops diabetes. It means that blood sugar levels are elevated but not elevated enough to warrant a diagnosis of diabetes. Usually, insulin and glucose levels are in equilibrium. If the blood glucose level is high, the body will produce more insulin to bring the glucose level down. This is called a feedback mechanism.

While your choice of beverage alone may not directly cause diabetes, genetics also play a significant role in predisposing a person to the condition. However, it is important to be aware that consuming a lot of fruit juices or fizzy drinks can have negative health effects. These beverages are typically high in sugar content and calories. When consumed in excess, they can contribute to obesity, which is a known risk factor for type 2 diabetes.Fruit juices, in particular, are high in fructose, which is a simple sugar similar to glucose. Over time, excessive consumption of sugary beverages can put a strain on the pancreas, leading to decreased insulin production. When the body doesn't have enough insulin to convert blood glucose into energy or store it as glycogen, there can be a build-up of glucose in the bloodstream. This elevated blood glucose level is a key indicator of untreated or uncontrolled diabetes.In summary, while fruit juices and fizzy drinks may not directly cause diabetes, their high sugar content and potential contribution to obesity can increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes, especially when consumed in excessive amounts over a prolonged period. It is essential to maintain a balanced diet and moderate the intake of sugary beverages to support overall health and reduce the risk of diabetes and its complications.

The pancreas is the factory that produces insulin. Insulin is the key to control blood glucose. Glucose is fuel for the body.

When you eat, more than 75% of our food, mainly carbohydrates, are broken down into glucose when digested. Glucose enters the bloodstream, and the level of blood glucose begins to rise. When our body senses an increase in blood glucose, it sends a signal to the pancreas to produce more insulin to lower the blood glucose level. If the blood glucose level is still high, more insulin will be produced to enter the bloodstream. The insulin acts as a key to unlock the body’s cells and allow glucose to pass from the bloodstream into the cells. The blood glucose level falls as glucose is transferred to the cells. The body cells use the glucose for fuel.

Glucose is stored as glycogen mainly in the liver, muscles, and fat tissues. Our body knows that glucose is a good product, and the kidneys act as filters to reabsorb the glucose into our blood by coating the red blood cells and transferring them to the muscle and liver to be stored as glycogen. When the liver, the main store, is full, excess glucose will be stored as triglycerides in the fat tissues. When our body needs energy, the stored glucose and glycogen in the liver will be broken down by insulin and converted to energy.

Type 1 diabetes is an auto-immune disease, where the pancreas is not producing insulin at all. Type 2 diabetes is a lifestyle disease, where the pancreas is not working efficiently or sufficiently. The onset of type 1 diabetes is often sudden, affecting children and young people below the age of 30. While more young and overweight people have developed type 2 diabetes in recent years, it usually occurs in the 40s. The cause of type 1 diabetes may be unknown; however, some people develop it after a bout of illness such as a viral infection. For type 2 diabetes, many have a family history of the disease. People with type 1 diabetes will need insulin injections for life, but type 2 diabetes can be controlled by adopting proper diet, exercise, and with medication.

Type 2 diabetes develops because the body becomes insulin resistant or does not respond effectively to natural insulin. This is possibly due to a defective gene factor. Initially, the pancreas may produce more insulin to cope with the increased blood glucose and to break down the food we eat. Usually, the patient needs anti-diabetic tablets or Oral Hypoglycaemic Agent (OHA) to control blood glucose. Eventually, the pancreas suffers a burnout and produces low levels of insulin. The diabetic patient may then need insulin injections.

Diabetes is more common nowadays due to several factors related to changes in our lifestyle and diet. In the past, we did not have many fast-food restaurants, high calorie beverages and rich foods. Fast food contains saturated fat, which is not easily broken down by the body and tends to deposit inside the blood vessels. Blood glucose and cholesterol levels will rise within the blood vessels. We also led more active lifestyles and children played outdoors instead of sitting in front of the television or computer. Seldom did we see children who were obese or very overweight. Today, we lead sedentary lives; some say that diabetes is a “New World Syndrome” – a disease due to urbanisation, high calorie diets, poor sedentary lifestyles, and bad habits.

Many people today tend to skip meals or eat at irregular hours because of work or poor lifestyle. When you skip a meal or eat only when you are very hungry, it is likely that you will have a heavy meal later. Your pancreas has to work doubly hard to produce more insulin to digest the food. When you skip a meal, the liver may release glucose into the blood. Over a period of time, the liver ‘learns to release glucose at odd times’. At the same time, the pancreas does not work efficiently, cannot produce sufficient or effective insulin. This is why some people with diabetes have high blood glucose levels, even when they do not eat.

Diabetes and heart diseases have a synergistic effect, which means that if a person has diabetes, he is likely to have heart disease as well and vice versa. That is why people with diabetes usually have more than one health problem. When the blood is thick with cholesterol and glucose, it increases the resistance and blood pressure. Just imagine, when a person has high blood pressure, the heart will have to pump harder to circulate blood in the body. Over a period of time, the blood vessels can become damaged from stress, illness, poor lifestyle, and diet.

